

--- PAGE NUMBER: 1 ---

2002L0044—EN—11.12.2008—002.001—1

 This document is meant purely as a documentation tool and the institutions do not assume any liability for its contents



►B   DIRECTIVE 2002/44/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL

                           of 25 June 2002
    on the minimum health and safety requirements regarding the exposure of workers to the risks
    arising from physical agents (vibration) (sixteenth individual Directive within the meaning of
                     Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC)
                        (OJ L 177, 6.7.2002, p. 13)



Amended by:

                                                  Official Journal

                                               No   page   date
►M1   Directive 2007/30/ECoftheEuropeanParliament andoftheCouncil of L 165 21 27.6.2007
      20 June 2007
►M2   Regulation (EC) No 1137/2008 of the European Parliament and of the L 311 1 21.11.2008
      Council of 22 October 2008

--- PAGE NUMBER: 2 ---

2002L0044—EN—11.12.2008—002.001—2

▼B
     DIRECTIVE 2002/44/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT
                AND OF THE COUNCIL

                   of 25 June 2002
     on the minimum health and safety requirements regarding the
     exposure of workers to the risks arising from physical agents
     (vibration) (sixteenth individual Directive within the meaning of
             Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC)

     THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE
     EUROPEAN UNION,
     Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, and
     in particular Article 137(2) thereof,
     Having regard to the proposal from the Commission(1), submitted after
     consultation with the Advisory Committee on Safety, Hygiene and
     Health Protection at Work,
     Having regard to the opinion of the Economic and Social
     Committee(2),
     Having consulted the Committee of the Regions,
     Acting inaccordance with theprocedure laid down inArticle 251 ofthe
     Treaty(3), in the light of the joint text approved by the Conciliation
     Committee on 8 April 2002,
     Whereas:
     (1) Under the Treaty the Council may, by means of directives, adopt
        minimum requirements for encouraging improvements, especially
        in the working environment, to guarantee a better level of
        protection of the health and safety of workers. Such directives
        are to avoid imposing administrative, financial and legal
        constraints in a way which would hold back the creation and
        development of small and medium-sized undertakings.
     (2) The communication from the Commission concerning its action
        programme relating to the implementation of the Community
        Charter of the Fundamental Social Rights of Workers provides
        for the introduction of minimum health and safety requirements
        regarding the exposure of workers to the risks caused by physical
        agents. In September 1990 the European Parliament adopted a
        resolution concerning this action programme(4), inviting the
        Commission in particular to draw up a specific directive on the
        risks caused by noise and vibration and by any other physical
        agent at the workplace.
     (3) As a first step, it is considered necessary to introduce measures
        protecting workers from the risks arising from vibrations owing
        to their effects on the health and safety of workers, in particular
        muscular/bone structure, neurological and vascular disorders.
        These measures are intended not only to ensure the health and
        safety of each worker on an individual basis, but also to create a
        minimum basis of protection for all Community workers in order
        to avoid possible distortions of competition.
     (4) This Directive lays down minimum requirements, thus giving
        Member States the option of maintaining or adopting more
     (1) OJ C 77, 18.3.1993, p. 12.
      OJ C 230, 19.8.1994, p. 3.
     (2) OJ C 249, 13.9.1993, p. 28.
     (3) Opinion of the European Parliament of 20 April 1994 (OJ C 128, 9.5.1994,
      p. 146) confirmed on 16 September 1999 (OJ C 54, 25.2.2000, p. 75),
      Council Common Position of 25 June 2001 (OJ C 301, 26.10.2001, p. 1)
      and Decision of the European Parliament of 23 October 2001 (not yet
      published in the Official Journal). Decision of the European Parliament of
      25 April 2002 and Council Decision of 21 May 2002.
     (4) OJ C 260, 15.10.1990, p. 167.

--- PAGE NUMBER: 3 ---

2002L0044—EN—11.12.2008—002.001—3

▼B

        favourable provisions for the protection of workers, in particular
        the fixing of lower values for the daily action value or the daily
        exposure limit value for vibrations. The implementation of this
        Directive should not serve to justify any regression in relation to
        the situation which already prevails in each Member State.
     (5) A system of protection against vibration must limit itself to a
        definition, free of excessive detail, of the objectives to be
        attained, the principles to be observed and the fundamental
        values to be used, in order to enable Member States to apply
        the minimum requirements in an equivalent manner.
     (6) The level of exposure to vibration can be more effectively
        reduced by incorporating preventive measures into the design
        of work stations and places of work and by selecting work
        equipment, procedures and methods so as to give priority to
        reducing the risks at source. Provisions relating to work
        equipment and methods thus contribute to the protection of the
        workers involved.
     (7) Employers should make adjustments in the light of technical
        progress and scientific knowledge regarding risks related to
        exposure to vibration, with a view to improving the safety and
        health protection of workers.
     (8) In the case of sea and air transport, given the current state of the
        art it is not possible to comply in all circumstances with the
        exposure limit values for whole-body vibration; provision
        should therefore be made for duly justified exemptions in some
        cases.
     (9) Since this Directive is an individual Directive within the meaning
        of Article 16(1) of Council Directive 89/391/EEC of 12 June
        1989 on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements
        in the safety and health of workers at work(1), that Directive
        therefore applies to the exposure of workers to vibration,
        without prejudice to more stringent and/or specific provisions
        contained in this Directive.
     (10) This Directive constitutes a practical step towards creating the
        social dimension of the internal market.
     (11) The measures necessary for the implementation of this Directive
        should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision
        1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for
        the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the
        Commission(2),
     HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:

                     SECTION I

                 GENERAL PROVISIONS

                      Article 1
                    Aim and scope
     1. This Directive, which is the 16th individual Directive within the
     meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC, lays down minimum
     requirements for the protection of workers from risks to their health and
     safety arising or likely to arise from exposure to mechanical vibration.

     (1) OJ L 183, 29.6.1989, p. 1.
     (2) OJ L 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23.

--- PAGE NUMBER: 4 ---

2002L0044—EN—11.12.2008—002.001—4

▼B

     2. The requirements of this Directive shall apply to activities in
     which workers are or are likely to be exposed to risks from mechanical
     vibration during their work.
     3. Directive 89/391/EEC shall apply fully to the whole area referred
     to in paragraph 1, without prejudice to more stringent and/or more
     specific provisions contained in this Directive.
                      Article 2

                     Definitions
     For the purposes of this Directive, the following terms shall mean:

     (a) ‘hand-arm vibration’: the mechanical vibration that, when trans-
       mitted to the human hand-arm system, entails risks to the health
       and safety of workers, in particular vascular, bone or joint, neuro-
       logical or muscular disorders;
     (b) ‘whole-body vibration’: the mechanical vibration that, when trans-
       mitted to the whole body, entails risks to the health and safety of
       workers, inparticular lower-back morbidity andtrauma ofthespine.
                      Article 3

            Exposure limit values and action values
     1. For hand-arm vibration:
     (a) the daily exposure limit value standardised to an eight-hour
       reference period shall be 5 m/s2;
     (b) the daily exposure action value standardised to an eight-hour
       reference period shall be 2,5 m/s2.

     Workers' exposure to hand-arm vibration shall be assessed or measured
     on the basis of the provisions of Point 1 of Part A of the Annex.
     2. For whole-body vibration:
     (a) the daily exposure limit value standardised to an eight-hour
       reference period shall be 1,15 m/s2 or, at the choice of the
       Member State concerned, a vibration dose value of 21 m/s1,75;
     (b) the daily exposure action value standardised to an eight-hour
       reference period shall be 0,5 m/s2 or, at the choice of the
       Member State concerned, a vibration dose value of 9,1 m/s1,75.
     Workers' exposure to whole-body vibration shall be assessed or
     measured on the basis of the provisions of Point 1 of Part B of the
     Annex.

                     SECTION II

               OBLIGATION OF EMPLOYERS

                      Article 4

             Determination and assessment of risks
     1. In carrying out the obligations laid down in Article 6(3) and
     Article 9(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC, the employer shall assess and,
     if necessary, measure the levels of mechanical vibration to which
     workers are exposed. Measurement shall be carried out in accordance
     with Point 2 of Part A or Point 2 of Part B of the Annex to this
     Directive, as appropriate.
     2. The level of exposure to mechanical vibration may be assessed by
     means of observation of specific working practices and reference to

--- PAGE NUMBER: 5 ---

2002L0044—EN—11.12.2008—002.001—5

▼B

     relevant information on the probable magnitude of the vibration corre-
     sponding to the equipment or the types of equipment used in the
     particular conditions of use, including such information provided by
     themanufactureroftheequipment.Thatoperationshallbedistinguished
     from measurement, which requires the use of specific apparatus and
     appropriate methodology.
     3. The assessment and measurement referred to in paragraph 1 shall
     be planned and carried out by competent services at suitable intervals,
     taking particular account of the provisions of Article 7 of Directive
     89/391/EEC concerning the necessary competent services or persons.
     The data obtained from the assessment and/or measurement of the
     level of exposure to mechanical vibration shall be preserved in a
     suitable form so as to permit consultation at a later stage.
     4. Pursuant to Article 6(3) of Directive 89/391/EEC, the employer
     shall give particular attention, when carrying out the risk assessment, to
     the following:
     (a) the level, type and duration of exposure, including any exposure to
       intermittent vibration or repeated shocks;
     (b) the exposure limit values and the exposure action values laid down
       in Article 3 of this Directive;
     (c) any effects concerning the health and safety of workers at parti-
       cularly sensitive risk;
     (d) any indirect effects on worker safety resulting from interactions
       between mechanical vibration and the workplace or other work
       equipment;
     (e) information provided by the manufacturers of work equipment in
       accordance with the relevant Community Directives;
     (f) the existence of replacement equipment designed to reduce the
       levels of exposure to mechanical vibration;
     (g) the extension of exposure to whole-body vibration beyond normal
       working hours under the employer's responsibility;
     (h) specific working conditions such as low temperatures;
     (i) appropriate information obtained from health surveillance, including
       published information, as far as possible.
     5. The employer shall be in possession of an assessment of the risk
     in accordance with Article 9(1)(a) of Directive 89/391/EEC and shall
     identify which measures must be taken in accordance with Articles 5
     and 6 of this Directive. The risk assessment shall be recorded on a
     suitable medium, according to national law and practice; it may
     include a justification by the employer that the nature and extent of
     the risks related to mechanical vibration make a further detailed risk
     assessment unnecessary. The risk assessment shall be kept up-to-date on
     a regular basis, particularly if there have been significant changes which
     could render it out-of-date, or when the results of health surveillance
     show it to be necessary.
                      Article 5
         Provisions aimed at avoiding or reducing exposure
     1. Taking account of technical progress and of the availability of
     measures to control the risk at source, the risks arising from exposure
     to mechanical vibration shall be eliminated at their source or reduced to
     a minimum.
     The reduction of such risks shall be based on the general principles of
     prevention set out in Article 6(2) of Directive 89/391/EEC.
     2. On the basis of the risk assessment referred to in Article 4, once
     the exposure action values laid down in Article 3(1)(b) and (2)(b) are

--- PAGE NUMBER: 6 ---

2002L0044—EN—11.12.2008—002.001—6

▼B

     exceeded, the employer shall establish and implement a programme of
     technical and/or organisational measures intended to reduce to a
     minimum exposure to mechanical vibration and the attendant risks,
     taking into account in particular:
     (a) other working methods that require less exposure to mechanical
       vibration;
     (b) the choice of appropriate work equipment of appropriate ergonomic
       design and, taking account of the work to be done, producing the
       least possible vibration;
     (c) the provision of auxiliary equipment that reduces the risk of injuries
       caused by vibration, such as seats that effectively reduce whole-
       body vibration and handles which reduce the vibration transmitted
       to the hand-arm system;
     (d) appropriate maintenance programmes for work equipment, the
       workplace and workplace systems;
     (e) the design and layout of workplaces and work stations;
     (f) adequate information and training to instruct workers to use work
       equipment correctly and safely in order to reduce their exposure to
       mechanical vibration to a minimum;
     (g) limitation of the duration and intensity of the exposure;
     (h) appropriate work schedules with adequate rest periods;

     (i) the provision of clothing to protect exposed workers from cold and
       damp.
     3. In any event, workers shall not be exposed above the exposure
     limit value.
     If, despite the measures taken by the employer to comply with this
     Directive, the exposure limit value is exceeded, the employer shall
     take immediate action to reduce exposure below the exposure limit
     value. He shall identify the reasons why the exposure limit value has
     been exceeded, and shall amend the protection and prevention measures
     accordingly in order to prevent it being exceeded again.
     4. Pursuant to Article 15 of Directive 89/391/EEC, the employer
     shall adapt the measures referred to in this Article to the requirements
     of workers at particular risk.
                      Article 6

              Worker information and training
     Without prejudice to Articles 10 and 12 of Directive 89/391/EEC, the
     employer shall ensure that workers who are exposed to the risks from
     mechanical vibration at work and/or their representatives receive infor-
     mation and training relating to the outcome of the risk assessment
     provided for in Article 4(1) of this Directive, concerning in particular:
     (a) the measures taken to implement this Directive in order to eliminate
       or reduce to a minimum the risks from mechanical vibration;
     (b) the exposure limit values and the exposure action values;
     (c) the results of the assessment and measurement of the mechanical
       vibration carried out in accordance with Article 4 of this Directive
       and the potential injury arising from the work equipment in use;
     (d) why and how to detect and report signs of injury;
     (e) the circumstances in which workers are entitled to health
       surveillance;
     (f) safe working practices to minimise exposure to mechanical
       vibration.

--- PAGE NUMBER: 7 ---

2002L0044—EN—11.12.2008—002.001—7

▼B
                      Article 7

            Consultation and participation of workers
     Consultation and participation of workers and/or of their representatives
     shall take place in accordance with Article 11 of Directive 89/391/EEC
     on the matters covered by this Directive.

                     SECTION III

               MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

                      Article 8

                   Health surveillance
     1. Without prejudice to Article 14 of Directive 89/391/EEC, Member
     States shall adopt provisions to ensure the appropriate health
     surveillance of workers with reference to the outcome of the risk
     assessment provided for in Article 4(1) of this Directive where it
     indicates a risk to their health. Those provisions, including the
     requirements specified for health records and their availability, shall
     be introduced in accordance with national laws and/or practice.
     Health surveillance, the results of which are taken into account in the
     application of preventive measures at a specific workplace, shall be
     intended to prevent and diagnose rapidly any disorder linked with
     exposure to mechanical vibration. Such surveillance shall be appropriate
     where:
     — the exposure of workers to vibration is such that a link can be
       established between that exposure and an identifiable illness or
       harmful effects on health,
     — it is probable that the illness or the effects occur in a worker's
       particular working conditions, and
     — there are tested techniques for the detection of the illness or the
       harmful effects on health.
     In any event, workers exposed to mechanical vibration in excess of the
     values stated in Article 3(1)(b) and(2)(b) shall be entitled to appropriate
     health surveillance.
     2. Member States shall establish arrangements to ensure that, for
     each worker who undergoes health surveillance in accordance with
     paragraph 1, individual health records are made and kept up-to-date.
     Health records shall contain a summary of the results of the health
     surveillance carried out. They shall be kept in a suitable form so as
     to permit any consultation at a later date, taking into account any
     confidentiality.
     Copies of the appropriate records shall be supplied to the competent
     authority on request. The individual worker shall, at his request, have
     access to the health records relating to him personally.
     3. Where,asaresultofhealthsurveillance,aworkerisfoundtohave
     an identifiable disease or adverse health effect which is considered by a
     doctor or occupational health-care professional to be the result of
     exposure to mechanical vibration at work:
     (a) the worker shall be informed by the doctor or other suitably
       qualified person of the result which relates to him personally. He
       shall, in particular, receive information and advice regarding any
       health surveillance which he should undergo following the end of
       exposure;
     (b) the employer shall be informed of any significant findings from the
       health surveillance, taking into account any medical confidentiality;

--- PAGE NUMBER: 8 ---

2002L0044—EN—11.12.2008—002.001—8

▼B

     (c) the employer shall:
       — review the risk assessment carried out pursuant to Article 4,
       — review the measures provided for to eliminate or reduce risks
         pursuant to Article 5,

       — take into account the advice of the occupational health-care
         professional or other suitably qualified person or the
         competent authority in implementing any measures required to
         eliminate or reduce risk in accordance with Article 5, including
         the possibility of assigning the worker to alternative work where
         there is no risk of further exposure, and
       — arrange continued health surveillance and provide for a review
         of the health status of any other worker who has been similarly
         exposed. In such cases, the competent doctor or occupational
         health care professional or the competent authority may propose
         that exposed persons undergo a medical examination.
                      Article 9
                  Transitional periods

     With regard to implementation of the obligations laid down in Article 5
     (3), Member States, after consultation of the two sides of industry in
     accordance with national legislation or practice, shall be entitled to
     make use of a maximum transitional period of five years from 6 July
     2005 where work equipment is used which was given to workers before
     6 July 2007 and which does not permit the exposure limit values to be
     respected, taking into account the latest technical advances and/or the
     organisational measures taken. With regard to equipment used in the
     agriculture and forestry sectors, Member States shall be entitled to
     extend the maximum transitional period by up to four years.
                     Article 10
                     Derogations
     1. In compliance with the general principles of health and safety
     protection for workers, Member States may, in the case of sea and air
     transport,derogatefromArticle 5(3)indulyjustifiedcircumstances with
     respect to whole-body vibration where, given the state of the art and the
     specific characteristics of workplaces, it is not possible to comply with
     the exposure limit value despite the technical and/or organisation
     measures taken.
     2. In a case where the exposure of a worker to mechanical vibration
     is usually below the exposure action values given in Article 3(1)(b) and
     (2)(b) but varies markedly from time to time and may occasionally
     exceed the exposure limit value, Member States may also grant dero-
     gations from Article 5(3). However, the exposure value averaged over
     40 hours must be less than the exposure limit value and there must be
     evidence to show that the risks from the pattern of exposure tothe work
     are lower than those from exposure at the exposure limit value.
     3. The derogations referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be granted
     by Member States after consultation of the two sides of industry in
     accordance with national laws and practice. Such derogations must be
     accompanied by conditions which guarantee, taking into account the
     special circumstances, that the resulting risks are reduced to a
     minimum and that the workers concerned are subject to increased
     health surveillance. Such derogations shall be reviewed every four
     years and withdrawn as soon as the justifying circumstances no
     longer obtain.
     4. Every four years Member States shall forward to the Commission
     a list of derogations as referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, indicating the

--- PAGE NUMBER: 9 ---

2002L0044—EN—11.12.2008—002.001—9

▼B

     exact reasons and circumstances which made them decide to grant the
     derogations.
▼M2
                     Article 11
                 Technical amendments

     Amendments to the Annex to this Directive of a purely technical nature
     shall be adopted by the Commission in line with:
     (a) theadoptionofdirectives inthefieldoftechnicalharmonisationand
       standardisation with regard to the design, building, manufacture or
       construction of work equipment and/or workplaces;
     (b) technical progress, changes in the most appropriate harmonised
       European standards or specifications and new findings concerning
       mechanical vibration.
     Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this
     Directive, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory
     procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 12(2). On imperative
     grounds of urgency, the Commission may have recourse to the
     urgency procedure referred to in Article 12(3).

                     Article 12
                  Committee procedure
     1. The Commission shall be assisted by the Committee referred to in
     Article 17(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC.

     2. Wherereference ismade tothisparagraph, Article 5a(1)to(4)and
     Article 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the
     provisions of Article 8 thereof.
     3. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5a(1), (2), (4)
     and (6) and Article 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having
     regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof.
▼B
                     SECTION IV

                  FINAL PROVISIONS

▼M1
                     __________
▼B

                     Article 14
                    Transposition
     1. The Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and
     administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive no
     later than 6 July 2005. They shall forthwith inform the Commission
     thereof. They shall also include a list, giving detailed reasons, of the
     transitional arrangements which the Member States have adopted in
     accordance with Article 9.
     When Member States adopt these measures, they shall contain a
     reference to this Directive or shall be accompanied by such reference
     on the occasion of their official publication. The methods of making
     such reference shall be laid down by Member States.
     2. Member States shall communicate the provisions of national law
     which they adopt or have already adopted in the field covered by this
     Directive to the Commission.

--- PAGE NUMBER: 10 ---

2002L0044—EN—11.12.2008—002.001—10

▼B
                     Article 15

                   Entry into force
     This Directive shall enter into force on the day of its publication in the
     Official Journal of the European Communities.

                     Article 16

                     Addressees
     This Directive is addressed to the Member States.

--- PAGE NUMBER: 11 ---

2002L0044—EN—11.12.2008—002.001—11

▼B
                      ANNEX


                A. HAND-ARM VIBRATION
     1. Assessment of exposure
       The assessment of the level of exposure to hand-arm vibration is based on
       the calculation of the daily exposure value normalised to an eight-hour
       reference period A(8), expressed as the square root of the sum of the
       squares (rms) (total value) of the frequency-weighted acceleration values,
       determined on the orthogonal axes a , a , a as defined in Chapters
                         hwx hwy hwz
       4 and 5 and Annex A to ISO standard 5349-1(2001).
       The assessment of the level of exposure may be carried out on the basis of
       an estimate based on information provided by the manufacturers concerning
       the level of emission from the work equipment used, and based on the
       observation of specific work practices or on measurement.
     2. Measurement
       When measurement is employed in accordance with Article 4(1):
       (a) the methods used may include sampling, which must be representative
         of the personal exposure of a worker to the mechanical vibration in
         question; the methods and apparatus used must be adapted to the
         particular characteristics of the mechanical vibration to be measured,
         to ambient factors and to the characteristics of the measuring
         apparatus, in accordance with ISO standard 5349-2(2001);
       (b) in the case of devices which need to be held with both hands,
         measurements must be made on each hand. The exposure is determined
         by reference to the higher value of the two; information for the other
         hand shall also be given.
     3. Interference
       Article 4(4)(d) will apply, in particular where the mechanical vibration
       interferes with the proper handling of controls or reading of indicators.
     4. Indirect risks
       Article 4(4)(d) will apply in particular when the mechanical vibration
       interferes with the stability of structures or the security of joints.
     5. Individual protectors
       Personal protective equipment against hand-arm vibration may contribute to
       the programme of measures referred to in Article 5(2).
               B. WHOLE-BODY VIBRATION
     1. Assessment of exposure
       The assessment of the level of exposure to vibration is based on the calcu-
       lationofdailyexposureA(8)expressedasequivalentcontinuousacceleration
       over an eight-hour period, calculated as the highest (rms) value, or the
       highest vibration dosevalue (VDV) of the frequency-weighted accelerations,
       determined on three orthogonal axes (1,4a , 1,4a , a for a seated or
                            wx  wy wz
       standing worker) in accordance with Chapters 5, 6 and 7, Annex A and
       Annex B to ISO standard 2631-1(1997).
       The assessment of the level of exposure may be carried out on the basis of
       an estimate based on information provided by the manufacturers concerning
       the level of emission from the work equipment used, and based on obser-
       vation of specific work practices or on measurement.
       In the case of maritime shipping, Member States may consider only
       vibrations of a frequency exceeding 1 Hz.
     2. Measurement
       When measurement is employed in accordance with Article 4(1), the
       methods used may include sampling, which must be representative of the
       personal exposure of a worker to the mechanical vibration in question. The
       methods used must be adapted to the particular characteristics of the
       mechanical vibration to be measured, to ambient factors and to the charac-
       teristics of the measuring apparatus.

--- PAGE NUMBER: 12 ---

2002L0044—EN—11.12.2008—002.001—12

▼B

     3. Interference
       Article 4(4)(d) will apply, in particular where the mechanical vibration
       interferes with the proper handling of controls or reading of indicators.
     4. Indirect risks
       Article 4(4)(d) will apply, in particular when the mechanical vibration
       interferes with the stability of structures or the security of joints.
     5. Extension of exposure
       Article 4(4)(g) will apply, in particular where, owing to the nature of the
       activity, a worker benefits from the use of rest facilities supervised by the
       employer; exposure to whole-body vibration in those facilities must be
       reduced to a level compatible with their purpose and conditions of use,
       except in cases of ‘force majeure’.