

--- PAGE NUMBER: 1 ---

02003L0010 — EN — 26.07.2019 — 003.001 — 1


This text is meant purely as a documentation tool and has no legal effect. The Union's institutions do not assume any liability
for its contents. The authentic versions of the relevant acts, including their preambles, are those published in the Official
 Journal of the European Union and available in EUR-Lex. Those official texts are directly accessible through the links
                         embedded in this document



►B   DIRECTIVE 2003/10/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL

                          of 6 February 2003
    on the minimum health and safety requirements regarding the exposure of workers to the risks
                     arising from physical agents (noise)
    (Seventeenth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC)
                        (OJ L 42, 15.2.2003, p. 38)



Amended by:

                                                  Official Journal

                                               No   page   date
►M1   Directive 2007/30/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of L 165 21 27.6.2007
      20 June 2007
►M2   Regulation (EC) No 1137/2008 of the European Parliament and of the L 311 1 21.11.2008
      Council of 22 October 2008
►M3   Regulation (EU) 2019/1243 of the European Parliament and of the L 198 241 25.7.2019
      Council of 20 June 2019

--- PAGE NUMBER: 2 ---

02003L0010 — EN — 26.07.2019 — 003.001 — 2

▼B
     DIRECTIVE 2003/10/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT
                AND OF THE COUNCIL
                  of 6 February 2003

     on the minimum health and safety requirements regarding the
     exposure of workers to the risks arising from physical agents (noise)
     (Seventeenth individual Directive within the meaning of
             Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC)

                     SECTION I
                 GENERAL PROVISIONS


                      Article 1
                    Aim and scope

     1. This Directive, which is the 17th individual Directive within the
     meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC, lays down minimum
     requirements for the protection of workers from risks to their health and
     safety arising or likely to arise from exposure to noise and in particular
     the risk to hearing.

     2. The requirements of this Directive shall apply to activities in
     which workers are or are likely to be exposed to risks from noise as
     a result of their work.


     3. Directive 89/391/EEC shall apply fully to the whole area referred
     to in paragraph 1, without prejudice to more stringent and/or specific
     provisions contained in this Directive.



                      Article 2

                     Definitions

     For the purposes of this Directive, the physical parameters used as risk
     predictors are defined as follows:


     (a) peak sound pressure (p
                    p eak
                     ): maximum value of the ‘C’-frequency
       weighted instantaneous noise pressure;
     (b) daily noise exposure level (L
                        E X,8h
                           ) (dB(A) re. 20 μPa): time-
       weighted average of the noise exposure levels for a nominal
       eight-hour working day as defined by international standard ISO
       1999: 1990, point 3.6. It covers all noises present at work,
       including impulsive noise;
     (c) weekly noise exposure level (L
                        E X,8h
                           ): time-weighted average of the
       daily noise exposure levels for a nominal week of five eight-hour
       working days as defined by international standard ISO 1999:1990,
       point 3.6 (note 2).

--- PAGE NUMBER: 3 ---

02003L0010 — EN — 26.07.2019 — 003.001 — 3

▼B
                      Article 3

          Exposure limit values and exposure action values

     1. For the purposes of this Directive the exposure limit values and
     exposure action values in respect of the daily noise exposure levels and
     peak sound pressure are fixed at:
     (a) exposure limit values: L
                    EX,8h
                        = 87 dB(A) and p
                                  peak
                                    = 200 Pa (1 )
       respectively;
     (b) upper exposure action values: L
                         EX,8h
                            85 dB(A) and p
                                     peak
                                        = 140
       Pa (2 ) respectively;
     (c) lower exposure action values: L
                         E X,8h
                            = 80 dB(A) and p
                                      peak
                                        = 112
       Pa (3 ) respectively.
     2. When applying the exposure limit values, the determination of the
     worker's effective exposure shall take account of the attenuation
     provided by the individual hearing protectors worn by the worker.
     The exposure action values shall not take account of the effect of any
     such protectors.
     3. In duly justified circumstances, for activities where daily noise
     exposure varies markedly from one working day to the next, Member
     States may, for the purposes of applying the exposure limit values and
     the exposure action values, use the weekly noise exposure level in place
     of the daily noise exposure level to assess the levels of noise to which
     workers are exposed, on condition that:
     (a) the weekly noise exposure level as shown by adequate monitoring
       does not exceed the exposure limit value of 87 dB(A); and
     (b) appropriate measures are taken in order to reduce the risk associated
       with these activities to a minimum.
                     SECTION II
               OBLIGATIONS OF EMPLOYERS
                      Article 4
             Determination and assessment of risks
     1. In carrying out the obligations laid down in Articles 6(3) and 9(1)
     of Directive 89/391/EEC, the employer shall assess and, if necessary,
     measure the levels of noise to which workers are exposed.
     2. The methods and apparatus used shall be adapted to the prevailing
     conditions particularly in the light of the characteristics of the noise to
     be measured, the length of exposure, ambient factors and the characte­
     ristics of the measuring apparatus.
     These methods and this apparatus shall make it possible to determine
     the parameters defined in Article 2 and to decide whether, in a given
     case, the values fixed in Article 3 have been exceeded.
     (1 ) 140 dB (C) in relation to 20 μPa.
     (2 ) 137 dB (C) in relation to 20 μPa.
     (3 ) 135 dB (C) in relation to 20 μPa.

--- PAGE NUMBER: 4 ---

02003L0010 — EN — 26.07.2019 — 003.001 — 4

▼B
     3. The methods used may include sampling, which shall be represen­
     tative of the personal exposure of a worker.

     4. The assessment and measurement referred to in paragraph 1 shall
     be planned and carried out by competent services at suitable intervals,
     taking particular account of the provisions of Article 7 of Directive
     89/391/EEC concerning the necessary competent services or persons.
     The data obtained from the assessment and/or measurement of the
     level of exposure to noise shall be preserved in a suitable form so as
     to permit consultation at a later stage.
     5. When applying this Article, the assessment of the measurement
     results shall take into account the measurement inaccuracies determined
     in accordance with metrological practice.

     6. Pursuant to Article 6(3) of Directive 89/391/EEC, the employer
     shall give particular attention, when carrying out the risk assessment, to
     the following:

     (a) the level, type and duration of exposure, including any exposure to
       impulsive noise;

     (b) the exposure limit values and the exposure action values laid down
       in Article 3 of this Directive;

     (c) any effects concerning the health and safety of workers belonging to
       particularly sensitive risk groups;
     (d) as far as technically achievable, any effects on workers' health and
       safety resulting from interactions between noise and work-related
       ototoxic substances, and between noise and vibrations;

     (e) any indirect effects on workers' health and safety resulting from
       interactions between noise and warning signals or other sounds
       that need to be observed in order to reduce the risk of accidents;

     (f) information on noise emission provided by manufacturers of work
       equipment in accordance with the relevant Community directives;

     (g) the existence of alternative work equipment designed to reduce the
       noise emission;

     (h) the extension of exposure to noise beyond normal working hours
       under the employer's responsibility;

     (i) appropriate information obtained following health surveillance,
       including published information, as far as possible;
     (j) the availability of hearing protectors with adequate attenuation char­
       acteristics.

     7. The employer shall be in possession of an assessment of the risk
     in accordance with Article 9(1)(a) of Directive 89/391/EEC, and shall
     identify which measures must be taken in accordance with Articles 5, 6,
     7 and 8 of this Directive. The risk assessment shall be recorded on a
     suitable medium, according to national law and practice. The risk
     assessment shall be kept up to date on a regular basis, particularly if
     there have been significant changes which could render it out of date, or
     when the results of health surveil lance show it to be necessary.

--- PAGE NUMBER: 5 ---

02003L0010 — EN — 26.07.2019 — 003.001 — 5

▼B
                      Article 5

         Provisions aimed at avoiding or reducing exposure

     1. Taking account of technical progress and of the availability of
     measures to control the risk at source, the risks arising from exposure
     to noise shall be eliminated at their source or reduced to a minimum.
     The reduction of such risks shall be based on the general principles of
     prevention set out in Article 6(2) of Directive 89/391/EEC, and take
     into account in particular:
     (a) other working methods that require less exposure to noise;

     (b) the choice of appropriate work equipment, taking account of the
       work to be done, emitting the least possible noise, including the
       possibility of making available to workers work equipment subject
       to Community provisions with the aim or effect of limiting
       exposure to noise;
     (c) the design and layout of workplaces and work stations;

     (d) adequate information and training to instruct workers to use work
       equipment correctly in order to reduce their exposure to noise to a
       minimum;

     (e) noise reduction by technical means:

       (i) reducing airborne noise, e.g. by shields, enclosures, sound-
         absorbent coverings;
       (ii) reducing structure-borne noise, e.g. by damping or isolation;

     (f) appropriate maintenance programmes for work equipment, the
       workplace and workplace systems;

     (g) organisation of work to reduce noise:

       (i) limitation of the duration and intensity of the exposure;
       (ii) appropriate work schedules with adequate rest periods.

     2. On the basis of the risk assessment referred to in Article 4, if the
     upper exposure action values are exceeded, the employer shall establish
     and implement a programme of technical and/or organisational measures
     intended to reduce the exposure to noise, taking into account in
     particular the measures referred to in paragraph 1.
     3. On the basis of the risk assessment referred to in Article 4, work­
     places where workers are likely to be exposed to noise exceeding the
     upper exposure action values shall be marked with appropriate signs.
     The areas in question shall also be delimited and access to them
     restricted where this is technically feasible and the risk of exposure
     so justifies.
     4. Where, owing to the nature of the activity, a worker benefits from
     the use of rest facilities under the responsibility of the employer, noise
     in these facilities shall be reduced to a level compatible with their
     purpose and the conditions of use.
     5. Pursuant to Article 15 of Directive 89/391/EEC, the employer
     shall adapt the measures referred to in this Article to the requirements
     of workers belonging to particularly sensitive risk groups.

--- PAGE NUMBER: 6 ---

02003L0010 — EN — 26.07.2019 — 003.001 — 6

▼B
                      Article 6

                  Personal protection

     1. If the risks arising from exposure to noise cannot be prevented by
     other means, appropriate, properly fitting individual hearing protectors
     shall be made available to workers and used by them in accordance with
     the provisions of Council Directive 89/656/EEC of 30 November 1989
     on the minimum health and safety requirements for the use by workers
     of personal protective equipment at the workplace (third individual
     Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive
     89/391/EEC) (1 ) and Article 13(2) of Directive 89/391/EEC and under
     the conditions set out below:
     (a) where noise exposure exceeds the lower exposure action values, the
       employer shall make individual hearing protectors available to
       workers;
     (b) where noise exposure matches or exceeds the upper exposure action
       values, individual hearing protectors shall be used;
     (c) the individual hearing protectors shall be so selected as to eliminate
       the risk to hearing or to reduce the risk to a minimum.

     2. The employer shall make every effort to ensure the wearing of
     hearing protectors and shall be responsible for checking the effec­
     tiveness of the measures taken in compliance with this Article.


                      Article 7
                 Limitation of exposure

     1. Under no circumstances shall the exposure of the worker as
     determined in accordance with Article 3(2) exceed the exposure limit
     values.
     2. If, despite the measures taken to implement this Directive,
     exposures above the exposure limit values are detected, the employer
     shall:

     (a) take immediate action to reduce the exposure to below the exposure
       limit values;
     (b) identify the reasons why overexposure has occurred; and

     (c) amend the protection and prevention measures in order to avoid any
       recurrence.


                      Article 8
              Worker information and training

     Without prejudice to Articles 10 and 12 of Directive 89/391/EEC the
     employer shall ensure that workers who are exposed to noise at work at
     or above the lower exposure action values, and/or their representatives,
     receive information and training relating to risks resulting from exposure
     to noise concerning, in particular:
     (a) the nature of such risks;

     (1 ) OJ L 393, 30.12.1989, p. 18.

--- PAGE NUMBER: 7 ---

02003L0010 — EN — 26.07.2019 — 003.001 — 7

▼B
     (b) the measures taken to implement this Directive in order to eliminate
       or reduce to a minimum the risks from noise, including the circum­
       stances in which the measures apply;

     (c) the exposure limit values and the exposure action values laid down
       in Article 3 of this Directive;

     (d) the results of the assessment and measurement of the noise carried
       out in accordance with Article 4 of this Directive together with an
       explanation of their significance and potential risks;

     (e) the correct use of hearing protectors;

     (f) why and how to detect and report signs of hearing damage;

     (g) the circumstances in which workers are entitled to health
       surveillance and the purpose of health surveillance, in accordance
       with Article 10 of this Directive;

     (h) safe working practices to minimise exposure to noise.


                      Article 9
            Consultation and participation of workers

     Consultation and participation of workers and/or of their representatives
     shall take place in accordance with Article 11 of Directive 89/391/EEC
     on the matters covered by this Directive, in particular:
     — the assessment of risks and identification of measures to be taken,
       referred to in Article 4,

     — the actions aimed at eliminating or reducing risks arising from
       exposure to noise, referred to in Article 5,

     — the choice of individual hearing protectors referred to in
       Article 6(1)(c).


                     SECTION III
               MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS


                     Article 10
                   Health surveillance

     1. Without prejudice to Article 14 of Directive 89/391/EEC, Member
     States shall adopt provisions to ensure the appropriate health
     surveillance of workers where the results of the assessment and
     measurement provided for in Article 4(1) of this Directive indicate a
     risk to their health. Those provisions, including the requirements
     specified for health records and their availability, shall be introduced
     in accordance with national law and/or practice.
     2. A worker whose exposure exceeds the upper exposure action
     values shall have the right to have his/her hearing checked by a
     doctor or by another suitably qualified person under the responsibility
     of a doctor, in accordance wit h national law and/or practice. Preventive

--- PAGE NUMBER: 8 ---

02003L0010 — EN — 26.07.2019 — 003.001 — 8

▼B
     audiometric testing shall also be available for workers whose exposure
     exceeds the lower exposure action values, where the assessment and
     measurement provided for in Article 4(1) indicate a risk to health.

     The objectives of these checks are to provide early diagnosis of any loss
     of hearing due to noise, and to preserve the hearing function.

     3. Member States shall establish arrangements to ensure that, for
     each worker who undergoes surveillance in accordance with paragraphs
     1 and 2, individual health records are made and kept up to date. Health
     records shall contain a summary of the results of the health surveillance
     carried out. They shall be kept in a suitable form so as to permit any
     consultation at a later date, taking into account any confidentiality.
     Copies of the appropriate records shall be supplied to the competent
     authority on request. The individual worker shall, at his or her request,
     have access to the health records relating to him or her personally.
     4. Where, as a result of surveillance of the hearing function, a worker
     is found to have identifiable hearing damage, a doctor, or a specialist if
     the doctor considers it necessary, shall assess whether the damage is
     likely to be the result of exposure to noise at work. If this is the case:
     (a) the worker shall be informed by the doctor or other suitably
       qualified person of the result which relates to him or her personally;

     (b) the employer shall:

       (i) review the risk assessment carried out pursuant to Article 4;
       (ii) review the measures provided for to eliminate or reduce risks
         pursuant to Articles 5 and 6;

       (iii) take into account the advice of the occupational healthcare
         professional or other suitably qualified person or the
         competent authority in implementing any measures required
         to eliminate or reduce risk in accordance with Articles 5 and
         6, including the possibility of assigning the worker to alter­
         native work where there is no risk of further exposure; and
       (iv) arrange systematic health surveillance and provide for a review
         of the health status of any other worker who has been similarly
         exposed.

                     Article 11

                     Derogations
     1. In exceptional situations where, because of the nature of the work,
     the full and proper use of individual hearing protectors would be likely
     to cause greater risk to health or safety than not using such protectors,
     Member States may grant derogations from the provisions of Articles
     6(1)(a) and (b) and 7.

     2. The derogations referred to in paragraph 1 shall be granted by
     Member States following consultation with both sides of industry and,
     where appropriate, with the medical authorities responsible, in
     accordance with national laws and/or practice. Such derogations must
     be accompanied by conditions which guarantee, taking into account the
     special circumstances, that the resulting risks are reduced to a minimum
     and that the workers concerned are subject to increased health surveil­
     lance. Such derogations shall be reviewed every four years and
     withdrawn as soon as the justifying circumstances no longer obtain.

--- PAGE NUMBER: 9 ---

02003L0010 — EN — 26.07.2019 — 003.001 — 9

▼B
     3. Every four years Member States shall forward to the Commission
     a list of derogations referred to in paragraph 1, indicating the exact
     reasons and circumstances which made them decide to grant the dero­
     gations.

▼M3
                     Article 12

                Amendments to the Directive
     The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance
     with Article 12a to make strictly technical amendments to this Directive
     in order to take account of technical harmonisation and standardisation
     with regard to the design, building, manufacture or construction of work
     equipment and workplaces, technical progress, changes in harmonised
     European standards or specifications and new findings concerning noise.

     Where, in duly justified and exceptional cases involving imminent,
     direct and serious risks to workers’ and other persons’ physical health
     and safety, imperative grounds of urgency require action in a very short
     timeframe, the procedure provided for in Article 12b shall apply to
     delegated acts adopted pursuant to this Article.

                     Article 12a
                 Exercise of the delegation

     1. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission
     subject to the conditions laid down in this Article.

     2. The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 12 shall
     be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 26 July
     2019. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the
     delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the
     five-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for
     periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the
     Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the
     end of each period.
     3. The delegation of power referred to in Article 12 may be revoked
     at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to
     revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that
     decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the
     decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date
     specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts
     already in force.
     4. Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult
     experts designated by each Member State in accordance with the prin­
     ciples laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on
     Better Law-Making (1 ).
     5. As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify
     it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council.

     6. A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 12 shall enter into
     force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European
     Parliament or the Council within a period of two months of notification
     of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before
     (1 ) OJ L 123, 12.5.2016, p. 1.

--- PAGE NUMBER: 10 ---

02003L0010 — EN — 26.07.2019 — 003.001 — 10

▼M3
     the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have
     both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period
     shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European
     Parliament or of the Council.


                     Article 12b
                   Urgency procedure

     1. Delegated acts adopted under this Article shall enter into force
     without delay and shall apply as long as no objection is expressed in
     accordance with paragraph 2. The notification of a delegated act to the
     European Parliament and the Council shall state the reasons for the use
     of the urgency procedure.

     2. Either the European Parliament or the Council may object to a
     delegated act in accordance with the procedure referred to in
     Article 12a(6). In such a case, the Commission shall repeal the act
     immediately following the notification of the decision to object by the
     European Parliament or by the Council.
                     __________


▼B

                     Article 14
                   Code of conduct

     In the context of the application of this directive Member States shall
     draw up in consultation with the social partners, in accordance with
     national law and practice, a code of conduct providing for practical
     guidelines to help workers and employers in the music and enter­
     tainment sectors to meet their legal obligations as laid down in this
     Directive.

                     Article 15
                      Repeal

     Directive 86/188/EEC is hereby repealed with effect from the date set
     out in the first subparagraph of Article 17(1).


                     SECTION IV
                  FINAL PROVISIONS

▼M1
                     __________

▼B
                     Article 17

                    Transposition
     1. The Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and
     administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive before
     15 February 2006. They sha ll forthwith inform the Commission thereof.

--- PAGE NUMBER: 11 ---

02003L0010 — EN — 26.07.2019 — 003.001 — 11

▼B
     When Member States adopt these measures, they shall contain a
     reference to this Directive or shall be accompanied by such reference
     on the occasion of their official publication. The methods of making
     such reference shall be laid down by the Member States.
     2. In order to take account of particular conditions, Member States
     may, if necessary, have an additional period of five years from 15
     February 2006, that is to say a total of eight years, to implement the
     provisions of Article 7 with regard to the personnel on board seagoing
     vessels.
     In order to allow for the drawing up of a code of conduct providing for
     practical guidelines for the implementation of the provisions of this
     Directive, Member States shall be entitled to make use of a maximum
     transitional period of two years from 15 February 2006, that is to say a
     total of five years from the entry into force of this Directive, to comply
     with this Directive, with regard to the music and entertainment sectors
     on the condition that during this period the levels of protection already
     achieved in individual Member States, with regard to the personnel in
     these sectors, are maintained.
     3. The Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text
     of the provisions of national law which they adopt or have already
     adopted in the field covered by this Directive.
                     Article 18
                   Entry into force

     This Directive shall enter into force on the day of its publication in the
     Official Journal of the European Union.

                     Article 19
                     Addressees

     This Directive is addressed to the Member States.